Sample Written History and Physical Examination
History and Physical Examination Comments
Patient Name: Rogers, Pamela
Date: 6/2/04
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient
Chief Complaint & ID: Ms. Rogers is a 56 y/o WF Define the reason for the patient’s visit as who has been
having chest pains for the last week. specifically as possible.
History of Present Illness
This is the first admission for this 56 year old woman, Convey the acute or chronic nature of the problem and
who states she was in her usual state of good health until establish a chronology.
one week prior to admission. At that time she noticed the
abrupt onset (over a few seconds to a minute) of chest pain onset
which she describes as dull and aching in character. The character
pain began in the left para-sternal area and radiated up to location
her neck. The first episode of pain one week ago occurred radiation
when she was working in her garden in the middle of the circumstances; exacerbating factors
day. She states she had been working for approximately 45
minutes and began to feel tired before the onset of the pain.
Her discomfort was accompanied by shortness of breath, but associated symptoms
no sweating, nausea, or vomiting. The pain lasted
approximately 5 to 10 minutes and resolved when she went duration
inside and rested in a cool area. resolution; alleviating factors
Since that initial pain one week ago she has had 2 additional Describe the natural history of her problem since its
episodes of pain, similar in quality and location to the first onset
episode. Three days ago she had a 15 minute episode of
pain while walking her dog, which resolved with rest. This Change or new circumstances to the problem
evening she had an episode of pain awaken her from sleep, New duration
lasting 30 minutes, which prompted her visit to the Reason she come in for visit
Emergency Department. At no time has she attempted any What has patient tried for relief
specific measures to relieve her pain, other than rest. She
describes no other associated symptoms during these
episodes of pain, including dizziness, or palpitations. She
becomes short of breath during these Relevant positive and negative ROS for this complaint
episodes but describes no other exertional dyspnea,
orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. No change in the pain
with movement, no association with food, no GERD sx, no palpable pain.
She has never been told she has heart problems, never had any Review of systems for the relevant organ system
chest pains before, does not have claudication. She was diagnosed with
HTN 3 years ago,
She does not smoke nor does she have diabetes. Relevant risk factor/environmental conditions
She was diagnosed with hypertension 3 years ago and had a
TAH with BSO 6 years ago. She is not on hormone replacement
therapy. There is a family history of premature CAD.
She does not know her cholesterol level.
Past Medical History
Surgical –
1994: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral This highly relevant, although it may seem like a
oophorectomy for uterine fibroids. trivial detail at first
1998: Bunionectomy Medical History –
1998: Diagnosed with hypertension and began on
unknown medication. Stopped after 6 months
because of drowsiness.
1990: Diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease, which
resolved after three months on cimetidine. She Always use generic names
describes no history of cancer, lung disease
or previous heart disease.
Allergy: Penicillin; experienced rash and hives in 1985. Always list the type of reported reaction
Social History –
Alcohol use: 1 or 2 beers each weekend; 1 glass of Quantity
wine once a week with dinner.
Tobacco use: None.
Medications: No prescription or illegal drug use.
Occasional OTC ibuprofen (Advil) for Include over-the-counter drugs
headache (QOD).
Family History
Mother: 79, alive and well. Comment specifically on the presence or absence of
Father: 54, deceased, heart attack. No brothers diseases relevant to the chief complaint
or sisters. There is a positive family history of
hypertension, but no diabetes, or cancer.
Review of Systems
HEENT:
No complaints of headache change in vision, nose or ear Separate each ROS section for easy identification
problems, or sore throat.
Cadiovascular:
See HPI OK to refer to HPI if adequately covered there
Gastrointestinal:
No complaints of dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, or change in List positive and negative findings in brief, concise
stool pattern, consistency, or color. She complains of phrases or sentences
epigastric pain, burning in quality, approximately twice a
month, which she notices primarily at night.
Genitourinary:
No complaints of dysuria, nocturia, polyuria, hematuria, or
vaginal bleeding.
Musculoskeletal:
She complains of lower back pain, aching in quality,
approximately once every week after working in her garden.
This pain is usually relieved with Tylenol. She complains of
no other arthralgias, muscle aches, or pains.
Neurological:
She complains of no weakness, numbness, or incoordination. Physical Examination
Vital Signs:
Blood Pressure 168/98, Pulse 90, Respirations 20, Always list vital signs. Check for orthostatic BP/P
Temperature 37 degrees. changes if it is relevant to the patient’s complaint
General:
Ms. Rogers appears alert, oriented and cooperative. Description may give very important clues as to the
nature or severity of the patient’s problem
Skin:
Normal in appearance, texture, and temperature Comment on all organ systems
HEENT:
Scalp normal. List specific normal or pathological findings when
relevant to the patient’s complaint
Pupils equally round, 4 mm, reactive to light and
accommodation, sclera and conjunctiva normal.
Fundoscopic examination reveals normal vessels without
hemorrhage.
Tympanic membranes and external auditory canals normal.
Nasal mucosa normal.
Oral pharynx is normal without erythema or exudate. Tongue
and gums are normal.
Neck:
Easily moveable without resistance, no abnormal adenopathy
in the cervical or supraclavicular areas. Trachea is midline
and thyroid gland is normal without masses. Carotid artery
upstroke is normal bilaterally without bruits. Jugular venous
pressure is measured as 8 cm with patient at 45 degrees.
Chest:
Lungs are clear to auscultation and percussion bilaterally This patient needs a detailed cardiac examination
except for crackles heard in the lung bases bilaterally. PMI
is in the 5th inter-costal space at the mid clavicular line. A
grade 2/6 systolic decrescendo murmur is heard best at the
second right inter-costal space which radiates to the neck.
A third heard sound is heard at the apex. No fourth heart
sound or rub are heard. Cystic changes are noted in the
breasts bilaterally but no masses or nipple discharge is
Seen.
Abdomen:
The abdomen is symmetrical without distention; bowel
sounds are normal in quality and intensity in all areas; a
bruit is heard in the right paraumbilical area. No masses or
splenomegaly are noted; liver span is 8 cm by percussion. More precise than saying “no hepatomegaly”
Extremities:
No cyanosis, clubbing, or edema are noted. Peripheral
pulses in the femoral, popliteal, anterior tibial, dorsalis pedis,
brachial, and radial areas are normal.
Nodes:
No palpable nodes in the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary
or inguinal areas.
Genital/Rectal:
Normal rectal sphincter tone; no rectal masses or Always include these exams, or comment specifically
tenderness. Stool is brown and guaiac negative. Pelvic why they were omitted exmaination reveals normal external genitalia, and normal
vagina and cervix on speculum examination. Bimanual
examination reveals no palpable uterus, ovaries, or masses.
Neurological:
Cranial nerves II-XII are normal. Motor and sensory
examination of the upper and lower extremities is normal.
Gait and cerebellar function are also normal. Reflexes are
normal and symmetrical bilaterally in both extremities.
Initial Problem List
1. Chest Pain Although you can omit this initial problem list from your
2. Dyspnea final written H&P, (and just list a final problem list
3. History of HTN (4 years) shown below), it is useful to make an initial list simply
4. History of TAH/BSO to keep track of all problems uncovered in the interview
5. History of peptic ulcer disease (#1-9 in this list) and exam (#10-13)
6. Penicillin allergy
7. FH of early ASCVD
8. Epigastric pain
9. Low back pain
10. Hypertension
11. Systolic murmur
12. Cystic changes of breasts
13. Abdominal bruit
Revised Problem List
1. Chest pain This list regroups related problems (or those you
2. FH of early ASCVD suspect are related) into a more logical sequence
3. Early surgical menopause
4. Dyspnea
5. Recent onset HTN
6. Abdominal bruit
7. Systolic ejection murmur
8. Epigastric pain
9. History of peptic ulcer disease
10. Lumbosacral back pain
11. OTC non-steroidal analgesic use
12. Cystic changes of breasts
13. Penicillin allergy Assessment and Differential Diagnosis
1. Chest pain with features of angina pectoris
This patient’s description of dull, aching, exertion
related substernal chest pain is suggestive of ischemic cardiac
origin. Her findings of a FH of early ASCVD, hypertension, and In the assessment you take each of the patient’s major
early surgical menopause are pertinent risk factors for development problems and draw conclusions, in this case that the chest
of coronary artery disease. Therefore, the combination of this pain is more likely due to ischemic heart disease instead
patient’s presentation, and the multiple risk factors make angina of other possibilities. You tie in several of the other
pectoris the most likely diagnosis. The pain symptoms appear to problems as risk factors for ischemic heart disease, and
be increasing, and the occurrence of pain at rest suggests this not merely as random unrelated problems. You should list
fits the presentation of unstable angina, and hospitalization is and extensive justification for your most likely diagnosis.
indicated. You should also explain why you are less suspicious of
alternative diagnoses, such as esophageal reflux disease,
Other processes may explain her chest pain, but pulmonary or musculoskeletal pain.
are less likely. Gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD) may
occur at night with recumbency, but usually is not associated with
exertion. The pain of GERD is usually burning, and the patient
describes no associated gastrointestinal symptoms such as
nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain which might suggest peptic
ulcer disease. The presence of dyspnea might suggest a
pulmonary component to this patient’s disease process, but
the absence of fever, cough or abnormal pulmonary examination
findings make a pulmonary infection less likely, and the
association of the dyspnea with the chest pain supports the
theory that both symptoms may be from ischemic heart disease.
2. Dyspnea
Her dyspnea may correlate with findings on physical
exam of a third heart sound and pulmonary crackles,
suggesting left ventricular dysfunction. In that case, she may As in the previous problem, you should explain, in more
be manifesting symptoms and findings of congestive heart detail than is shown in this example, why you felt the dyspnea
failure from myocardial ischemia. is more likely to be from ischemic heart disease, and not
asthma, bronchitis, or other possibilities. Follow this pattern
3. Recent onset hypertension and abdominal bruit for all subsequent problems.
This combination raises the possibility of a
secondary cause of hypertension, specifically ASCVD of the
renal artery leading to renovascular hypertension. The lack
of hypertensive retinopathy and left ventricular hypertrophy
on physical examination further support a recent onset of her
BP elevation.
4. Systolic murmur
The possibility of important valvular heart disease
is raised by the murmur, specifically, aortic stenosis. The
murmur radiates to the neck as an aortic valvular murmur
often does, but a normal carotid upstroke may mean this
murmur is not significant.
5. Epigastric discomfort, NSAID use with a history
of peptic ulcer disease.
6. Lumbo-sacral back pain
7. Fibrocystic breast disease
8. Penicillin allergy Plan:
1. Carefully monitor the patient for any increased chest pain that You should develop a diagnostic and therapeutic plan
might be indicative of impending myocardial infarction by admitting for the patient. Your plan should incorporate acute and
the patient to the telemetry floor. long-term care of the patient’s most likely problem. You
should consider pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic
2. Start platelet inhibitors, such as aspirin to decrease the risk of measures and be cognizant of the fact that you need to
myocardial infarction; start nitrates to decrease the risk of occlusion treat the symptoms (i.e. make the patient comfortable) as
and to treat her symptoms of pain. For prolonged pain un- much as treating the disease when possible. You are
responsive to nitrates, she may need an analgesic such as expected to know the usual classes of medications used
morphine. The nitrates will also help to lower her BP. to treat these illnesses.
3. Patient should have her cholesterol monitored and when
discharged she should be started on an appropriate exercise and
weight loss program, including a low-fat diet. If her cholesterol
is elevated, she may need cholesterol-lowering medication such
as HMG Co-reductases.
4. Schedule a cardiac catheterization since non-invasive
tests have a high pretest probability for being positive and regard-
less of the result, negative or positive, she will need a cath
5. Begin diuretics for her dyspnea which is most likely secondary
to volume overload – this will treat her high BP as well. She should
have a ventriculogram with the cath that will assess cardiac size
and presence of wall motion abnormalities.
6. Appropriate lab work would include BUN/Creatinine
to assess kidney function, electrolytes and baseline EKG.